TL;DR.
This week in 30 seconds:.
Claude Opus 4.7: Anthropic's new flagship solves 3x more production tasks than its predecessor on SWE-Bench – at the same price ($5/$25 per million tokens).
Cursor: $2B funding round at a $50B valuation currently in negotiations – ARR expected to grow from $2B to $6B+ by end of 2026.
Open assault: Alibaba's Qwen3.6 runs for free on a MacBook Pro M5 and beats Claude Opus 4.7 on creative tasks in a direct SVG test – open source is rewriting the rules.
Warning signal: Stanford AI Index 2026 confirms: 20% fewer jobs for young software developers since 2022, while AI data centers already consume 29.6 gigawatts of electricity.
Story of the Week.
3x More Production Coding – Anthropic Raises the Bar
A model that's nearly twice as safe as its predecessor and simultaneously solves three times more real production bugs – that sounds like marketing, but it's the benchmark reality of Claude Opus 4.7 published by Anthropic .
Anthropic unveiled Claude Opus 4.7 as its new flagship model on April 16, 2026 .
The most remarkable number: on SWE-Bench Verified – the leading benchmark for real software engineering tasks – Opus 4.7 solves three times more production tasks than its predecessor Opus 4.6, according to Anthropic's own measurements; independent validations are still pending .
On an internal 93-task coding benchmark, the improvement is 13% .
Anyone using Claude Code daily will feel this directly in their workflow.
There's also a massive safety upgrade: 98.5% on the Visual Acuity benchmark, compared to 54.5% for Opus 4.6 – measured on Anthropic's own benchmark .
This isn't a marginal improvement; it's a leap that makes Opus 4.7 genuinely suitable for agentic and automated production environments for the first time.
Also new is the  effort level – finer control between maximum reasoning depth and latency, well-suited for long agentic runs .
Additionally, Task Budgets (Beta) for token spend control  and a dedicated  command for code reviews .
Vision has also been enhanced: images up to 2,576 pixels (3.75 megapixels) are now processed – more than three times the previous resolution .
"Prompts written for earlier models can sometimes now produce unexpected results."
— Anthropic, in the official release blog post
Open questions: The price remains unchanged at $5/M input and $25/M output tokens  – fair, but the direct comparison with Alibaba's Qwen3.6-35B (free, runs locally) shows how quickly the market is shifting beneath Anthropic.
How long will the closed-source model remain the superior tool when an open-source model on a consumer laptop outperforms it for SVG generation?
Bottom line: Anyone using Claude Code professionally should test Opus 4.7 – but recalibrate existing prompts, as the changed model personality can lead to unexpected outputs.
More Top Stories.
Cursor: $50B and the Question of Whether the Hype Holds.
Cursor is negotiating a funding round of more than $2 billion at a valuation of $50 billion .
For comparison: in November 2025, the company was still valued at $29.3B .
The driver is real growth: with an ARR of $2B in February 2026 and positive gross margins in the enterprise segment for the first time, Cursor has shown that the business model works .
By end of 2026, the company expects an ARR of over $6B (company projection) – a tripling in ten months .
The $50B valuation is not yet confirmed, however: as long as negotiations are ongoing, the figure remains speculative – and historically such numbers are occasionally revised downward during the fundraising phase .
Nvidia is reportedly among the new investors – a strategic signal that goes beyond mere capital .
For AI developers, this means: the market for agentic coding tools is consolidating, and Cursor, Claude Code, and OpenAI Codex are now competing for enterprise budgets.
Anyone who hasn't yet evaluated which tool fits their workflow should do so now.
Physical Intelligence π0.7: The Robot That Improvises.
A robot operates an air fryer – even though only two episodes of this existed in the entire training dataset .
That sounds trivial, but it's the core of π0.7, Physical Intelligence's new model: compositional generalization – combining learned skills for entirely new tasks.
Physical Intelligence unveiled π0.7 on April 16 .
The model can brew coffee, fold laundry, assemble boxes, and yes, operate an air fryer – without each skill being explicitly trained .
Sergey Levine, co-founder of Physical Intelligence, described his own reaction:.
"I am rarely surprised.
But the last few months were the first time where I'm genuinely surprised."
As with all robotics demos, the gap between controlled lab conditions and real-world deployment scenarios remains an open question – robust generalization in real environments still needs to be demonstrated.
The company is simultaneously negotiating a new funding round that would lift its valuation from the current $5.6B to around $11B .
For industry observers, π0.7 is a signal of where generalizable robotics is heading: away from the "one robot, one task" paradigm, toward adaptive systems.
Stanford AI Index 2026: Faster Than PC, Costlier Than Expected.
The figures in the Stanford AI Index 2026 are sobering and impressive in equal measure .
AI has surpassed both the PC and the internet in adoption speed: over 50% of the world's population uses AI, 88% of organizations have adopted it, and 80% of university students too .
Meanwhile, productivity data shows real progress: +14% in customer support, +26% in software development .
But the cost is visible.
AI data centers consume 29.6 gigawatts of electricity worldwide .
GPT-4o alone requires as much drinking water annually as 1.2 million people .
And the labor market is already responding: employment among software developers aged 22 to 25 has dropped 20% since 2022 .
A third of organizations expect targeted workforce reductions due to AI, according to the index .
Anyone working in or dependent on the AI industry will find the most important data foundation of the year in this index.
Quick Hits.
Briefly noted:.
OpenAI Codex: OpenAI expands Codex with agentic desktop functions that compete directly with Anthropic's Computer Use – the battle for the agentic coding market is escalating .
OpenAI exodus: CPO Kevin Weil and Bill Peebles (Research Director, Sora project) are leaving OpenAI; Sora cost approximately $1M per day – the company is scaling back side projects and focusing on enterprise AI .
AI commerce: Adobe analyzed 1 trillion website visits: AI-generated traffic to US retailers rose 393% in Q1 2026, with 42% higher conversion rates and 37% higher revenue per visit .
Tool of the Week.
Qwen3.6-35B-A3B (via LM Studio) – Open-source model that beats Anthropic's flagship on a consumer laptop.
Simon Willison tested Alibaba's Qwen3.6-35B-A3B locally on a MacBook Pro M5 via LM Studio and reached a clear verdict: for SVG generation and creative tasks, the model outperforms Claude Opus 4.7 – and does so for free, offline, on consumer hardware .
What makes the architecture special is its Mixture-of-Experts design: 35 billion total parameters, but only 3 billion active parameters per token .
The quantized GGUF version (Q4_K_S from Unsloth) is 20.9 GB  – no problem for a MacBook Pro M5.
"Qwen3.6-35B-A3B running on a laptop is a better bet than Opus 4.7!"
— Simon Willison, after direct model comparison
Important context: This assessment is based on a single local test for creative/visual tasks – no production validation, no enterprise support.
For complex coding tasks, security requirements, or regulated environments, the comparison does not apply automatically.
Particularly relevant for teams looking to build local AI workflows without cloud costs or privacy concerns.
Anyone using Opus 4.7 for creative or visual tasks should test Qwen3.6 as a free alternative.
Qwen3.6-35B on Hugging Face
Fail of the Week.
"80% Acceptance Rate" – And Why That Number Lies
Developers report accepting 80–90% of AI-generated code .
Sounds like enormous time savings.
But it isn't: after revisions, rewrites, and debugging, the real acceptance rate is only 10–30% .
The phenomenon has a name: "tokenmaxxing" – stuffing context windows with as much code as possible in hopes of better outputs .
The data is alarming: Faros AI measures a code churn rate of +861% under heavy AI usage .
GitClear reports 9.4x the churn compared to non-AI users .
Jellyfish has found: developers with large token budgets produce twice the output – but at ten times the token cost .
Junior developers accept significantly more AI-generated code uncritically and consequently have to rework more .
Root cause: The narrative of "AI takes over the job" tempts people to equate output volume with output quality.
AI generates fast, but not always correctly – and the more code is produced, the more debt accumulates.
What we learn: Don't measure AI productivity by accepted lines of code, but by churn rate and time-to-stable-commit.
If both are rising, you're shipping worse software faster.
Number of the Week.
29.6 Gigawatts
That's how much electricity AI data centers consume worldwide – as of today .
That's equivalent to the capacity of roughly 30 mid-sized coal power plants, or the total electricity consumption of countries like the Netherlands.
GPT-4o alone consumes as much drinking water as 1.2 million people per year .
AI's energy hunger is no longer an abstract future scenario – it's measurable, grows with each model generation, and is becoming the central infrastructure challenge of the industry.
Anyone talking about AI governance without mentioning energy is leaving out the most critical variable.
Reading List.
For the weekend:.
1.  Stanford AI Index 2026 – Full Report  – 500 pages of data on the global AI landscape: adoption, jobs, benchmarks, costs, regulation.
The most important AI document of the year – and the charts summary from MIT Tech Review is enough to get started (10 min).
2.  Simon Willison: Qwen beats Opus  – A hands-on test with concrete SVG outputs and direct model comparison.
Shows clearly why open-source models are putting pressure on the closed-source market – and how to test them yourself (5 min).
3.  Physical Intelligence π0.7 – Compositionality in Robotics  – For anyone who wants to understand why compositional generalization is the next major breakthrough in robotics.
Explains the concept without prior knowledge required (4 min).
Next Week.
What's coming:.
Google I/O 2026 (May 27) is approaching: early rumors about Gemini Ultra 2 and Project Astra updates are expected this week – we're watching the pre-announcements.
Cursor funding: The negotiated $2B round at a $50B valuation should be officially confirmed or denied in the coming days – with signaling implications for the entire AI developer tools market.
Qwen ecosystem: Following Qwen3.6's surprise success, community fine-tunes and specializations are to be expected – LM Studio and Ollama releases are on watch.
This newsletter was researched and written AI-assisted.
Images generated with  Pollinations.ai .